Amazon S3 Vectors with Spice Blog Post (#1087)
spiceai/docs: website/blog/2025/amazon-s3-vectors-with-spice.mdx

## Vector Search with Embeddings

Vector similarity search retrieves data by comparing items in a high-dimensional embedding space rather than by exact keywords. In a typical pipeline:

- **Data to vectors:** We first convert each data item (text, image, etc.) into a numeric vector representation (embedding) using an ML model. For example, a customer review text might be turned into a 768-dimensional embedding that encodes its semantic content. Models like Amazon Titan Embeddings, OpenAI, or Hugging Face sentence transformers handle this step.

- **Index storage:** These vectors are stored in a specialized index or database optimized for similarity search. This could be a dedicated vector database or, in our case, Amazon S3 Vectors acting as the index. Each vector is stored with an identifier (e.g. the primary key of the source record) and possibly metadata.

- **Query by vector:** A search query (e.g. a phrase or image) is also converted into an embedding vector. The vector index is then queried to find the closest stored vectors by distance metric (cosine, Euclidean, dot product, etc.). The result is a set of IDs of the most similar items, often with a similarity score.

> This process enables **semantic search** – results are returned based on meaning and similarity rather than exact text matches. It powers features like finding relevant documents by topic even if exact terms differ, recommendation systems (finding similar user behavior or content), and providing knowledge context to LLMs in RAG. With Spice.ai’s integration, this whole lifecycle (embedding data, indexing vectors, querying) is managed by the Spice runtime and exposed via a familiar SQL or HTTP interface.

Reviewer: Branding -> 'Spice AI' vs 'Spice.ai'?

> This process enables **semantic search** – results are returned based on meaning and similarity rather than exact text matches. It powers features like finding relevant documents by topic even if exact terms differ, recommendation systems (finding similar user behavior or content), and providing knowledge context to LLMs in RAG. With Spice.ai’s integration, this whole lifecycle (embedding data, indexing vectors, querying) is managed by the Spice runtime and exposed via a familiar SQL or HTTP interface.

Author: ```suggestion
This process enables **semantic search** – results are returned based on meaning and similarity rather than exact text matches. It powers features like finding relevant documents by topic even if exact terms differ, recommendation systems (finding similar user behavior or content), and providing knowledge context to LLMs in RAG. With the Spice.ai Open Source integration, this whole lifecycle (embedding data, indexing vectors, querying) is managed by the Spice runtime and exposed via a familiar SQL or HTTP interface.
```
